To Whom It May Concern,

Rachel Thorman is exceptionally talented and well trained in chemistry.  It is with great pleasure that I can give you my strongest possible recommendation.  Wherever she chooses to go, Rachel will be among the best students in the program.

It was a privilege to have Rachel working in our technician pool.  She has capabilities off the top of our scale, and we have seized the opportunity to make full use of them.  Within weeks she let her supervisor know she could do far more than he was asking, and so he assigned her to my project team, where we have given her the opportunity to take on professional responsibilities in addition to the routine and mindless work that has to be done by technicians.  She has excelled in all areas.  She needs no supervision for the ordinary work, and has used her organizational skills to get what we have to get done in a day done in well less than half a day.  This left over half the day for more professional work and/or extra ordinary work.

Rachel expressed an interest in reading what she needed to know to understand the research objectives of the project.  We gave her lots to read, and she read it well which required some off-hours reading.  She was trained and ready to go in a couple of weeks.  We are generating a lot of data that provides the basis for powerpoint presentations that we hope will eventually result in commercialization of the technology we are working on.  Rachel got herself trained to be a power user of our sample management software, and built a spreadsheet to consolidate the data.  She is working on the next step of creating the powerpoint graphics that will be used to share the project results with other researchers and management.  This is all work that I was expecting to have to do myself.

If all this weren't enough, Rachel has great social skills.  Our work is meant to influence the work of many colleagues in the building.  We have asked Rachel to spread the word amongst the other technicians working on our team and other related teams that what we are doing is fun, exciting, and relevant - something that they should make an effort to learn about.  She has done a fantastic job and we get nothing but wonderful reports from everyone who knows her.

If there is anything I can do to strengthen my recommendation for Rachel, don't hesitate to contact me.