Elements of Intentional Communication in Cotton-Top Tamarin Calling BehaviorEvia ZackIntroduction      Animal communication has been a topic of interest to scientists for decades, particularly the motivation behind animals emitting vocalizations and the ways in which communication in animals may parallel that of humans. Recently researchers have discovered animal communication systems that share a great many similarities to human language, and now the question is how and why some systems evolved that way, while others did not (Crockford et al 2012, Cheney & Seyfarth 1980, Marler et al 1986, Schel et al 2013). By identifying the similarities to human language in animal communication systems, we can better our knowledge about the selection pressures that induced our language, and gain a better understanding of communication as a whole.       Originally, all animal communication was assumed to be reactive, fixed, and reflected the expression of the animal’s emotional state. It was assumed that they have no control over the production of these signals, and instead produce calls as a fixed action pattern (FAP)(Manser 2013). The implication behind the FAP is that there is no volitional control over the production of these calls, and no directionality based on a specific receiver. This type of system is also known as dyadic – communication between a sender and nonspecific receivers, containing no external information. Much of the studied animal communication has been classified as dyadic (Hurford 2007 as cited in Schel et al 2012).      However, in 1980, two scientists (Cheney and Seyfarth) offered the first evidence for a triadic system in vervet monkeys (Cheney & Seyfarth 1980). Instead of just consisting of two elements, a sender and receiver, triadic communication includes a sender, receiver, and an external referent (Schel et al 2013). This external referent can be a predator, a food item, or a social situation (food guarding, aggression towards subordinate offspring, etc). The triadic system is ubiquitous in human language, but somewhat more rare in the animal kingdom, although more and more evidence is suggesting that it is more common than previously thought (Schel et al 2013).      The 1980 study conducted by Cheney and Seyfarth discovered that vervet monkeys (Cercopithecus aethiops) have predator-specific alarm calls. By recording the variety of predator alarm calls these monkeys gave, and making note of which predators were present when the alarm was given, the researchers discovered that there were three significantly different alarm calls that referred to specific predators. By conducting a playback experiment in which the calls were played to the monkeys in the absence of an actual predator, they concluded that the calls alone were sufficient to evoke specific, mutually exclusive escape responses, suggesting that these calls contain semantic information, or are “referential”. However, there was (and is still) no information on the cognitive mechanisms at work in either the signaler or receiver, leading to the coining of the term “functional reference” in place of “semantic”(Cheney & Seyfarth 1980, Manser 2013, Schel et al 2013, Townsend & Manser 2013). For a call to be defined as functionally referential, it must be context specific and able to produce a stereotypic response in the receiver in the absence of the evoking stimuli.      Many studies similar to that of Cheney and Seyfarth (1980) have been conducted since 1980, in which calls in either a feeding or alarm context have been recorded in conjunction with the eliciting stimulus, followed by playback experiments in which the receiver response is recorded when the calls are played in the absence of the eliciting stimulus (Crockford et al 2012, Di Bitetti 2003, Farago et al 2010, Furrer and Manser 2009, Kitzman & Caine 2009, Marler et al 1986, Pereira and Macedonia 1991, Seyfarth et al 1980, Slocombe & Zuberbuhler 2005, Zuberbuhler et al 1999). These studies have illuminated functionally referential calls in a number of social species, independent of phylogeny. Domestic chickens (Gallus gallus, Evans 2002, Evans and Evans 2007) and ravens (Corvus corax, Bugnyar et al 2001) have both been found to have functionally referential calls. Several different species of mammal, such as meerkats (Suricata suricatta) and domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) have functionally referential communication; meerkats possess functionally referential alarm calls (Furrer and Manser 2009), while dogs are sensitive to the context in which different growls are emitted in playback experiments (Farago et al 2010).      Many primates have functionally referential calls in both alarm and food contexts. From prosimians to New World monkeys, evidence for triadic systems has been found. Ringtailed lemurs (Lemur catta),vervet monkeys (Cercopithecus aethiops), Diana monkeys (Cercopithecus diana diana), and chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) all possess functionally referential alarm calls (Crockford et al 2012, Pereira and Macedonia 1991, Seyfarth et al 1980, Zuberbuhler et al 1999), while capuchins (Cebus paella nigritus), marmosets (Callithrix geoffroyi), and chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) show functionally referential food calls (Di Bitetti 2003, Kitzman & Caine 2009, Slocombe & Zuberbuhler 2005). For example, Geoffrey’s marmosets were the first primate to be shown to have functionally referential food calls – when food calls were played back to a group of marmosets, there was a significant increase in food related behaviors (foraging and feeding) compared to control sounds (Kitzmann & Caine 2009).       One of the most significant aspects of the discovery of these referential calls, indicating triadic communication systems, is that this communication could also indicate intentional call production (to inform an ignorant receiver about an external event) – a level of control not previously associated with non-human animals. According to Schel et al (2013), in order to assume intentionality, there are three behavioral elements that must be present in the same system – the calls must be functionally referential, there must be voluntary control over call initiation, and the calls must be directed at specific receivers, with the understanding and intention of manipulating this receiver’s mental state.       While this first criterion of defining functional reference has been well studied, as previously mentioned, research into the second two criteria for intentional communication (volitional control over call production and directionality of calls) is much less common. However, evidence for these elements has been found in two communication systems thus far – that of chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes), and that of the domestic chicken (Gallus gallus).       Marler et al (1986) recorded the number of male chickens food calls (which are known to be functionally referential by Evans 2002 and Evans and Evans 2007) in response to both a food and non-food item, in the presence of both male and female conspecifics (familiar and strange), as well as while alone. The chickens call significantly less with another male present than when alone, and significantly more with the females. They will also produce significant amounts of food calls to the non-food item in the presence of an unfamiliar female, indicating deception. Chickens are sensitive to audience when producing alarm calls – they will only produce alarm calls when members of the same species are present (Karakashian et al 1986). These studies show voluntary control of signal production and directionality in terms of changing rate of calls because of the specific receiver, especially considering the elements of deception, highly indicative of intentional communication.      In 2012, Crockford et al studied alarm calls in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes), in which the number of “alert hoos” upon seeing a manufactured snake were recorded when the target chimpanzee was surrounded both by naïve and informed conspecifics (Crockford et al 2012). By taking the knowledge state of the receivers into account, as well as other factors such as the target chimp’s knowledge state, and its social bonds with other members of its social group, and comparing the number of alert hoos produced in different circumstances, it was determined that the alarm-calling behavior is primarily driven by others’ awareness of the danger – these calls were directed at ignorant individuals, suggesting both volitional control and directionality. It has also been determined that these alarm calls are socially specific – more likely to be produced when the ignorant receiver is of higher social standing, or has close social bonds with the sender – supporting the idea that they are directional (Schel et al 2013).       Chimpanzee food calls (or “rough grunts”) are also functionally referential, and are not an automatic response to a food encounter (Schel et al 2013, Slocombe & Zuberbuhler 2005). Schel et al (2013) recorded the number of rough grunts produced when a lone feeding chimpanzee heard the recorded arrival “pant hoots” of different individuals from his troop. The results showed that rough grunts were produced selectively to specific individuals (higher ranked individual with which the target had a close social bond), indicating that food calls are directional and volitionally controlled. Although this study had a small sample size (n=12), it was well controlled, and in conjunction with the study by Crockford et al (2012) is very convincing. This research supports the idea that chimpanzees are capable of intentional, triadic communication; the extent of this intention is still up for debate, however, and more research is necessary to determine whether the knowledge state of receivers is taken into account in the sender’s calling behavior.      Outside these studies, there is little conclusive evidence for intentional communication. Recent studies have offered evidence towards voluntary call production in several species, both primate and nonprimate; a number of behavioral studies have shown that call production is sensitive to audience (Cheney and Seyfarth 1985, Gros-Louis 2004, Wilson et al 2001 as cited in Schel et al 2013). However, Cheney and Seyfarth (1990) conducted a study in which a mother macaque (Macaca fuscata or M. mulatta) was exposed to either a hidden food or predator stimulus, and her offspring (either informed or ignorant, based on the condition) was released into the test arena with the hidden stimulus. The number of vocalizations from the mother and her offspring’s response were recorded, and no difference was shown between the knowledgeable and ignorant conditions, suggesting that the behavior of the mother was unaffected by her offspring’s mental state. The author’s determined that macaques do not attend to the receiver’s mental state when calling. They could be attending to receiver behavior indicating knowledge or ignorance, but there is little to no evidence thus far to suggest that macaques take mental states into account, a requirement for intentional communication. Further experiments determining directionality and volitional control in Old World monkeys are currently lacking.       There is also a gap in the research regarding New World monkey communication, apart from studies regarding the functional reference of their calls. New World monkeys are a subfamily of primates that split from the rest of the primate family between 30 and 40 million years ago, which includes marmosets, tamarins, and cebid monkeys (Tomasello & Call 1997). A moderate amount of experiments have revealed that several species of New World monkey have functionally referential food calls, indicating that these primates have some level of control over their vocalizations.       The cotton-top tamarin, Saguinus oedipus, one of the world’s most threatened and endangered species due to habitat fragmentation, now resides primarily in a select number of research labs. A comprehensive study on the vocal patterns of cotton top tamarins, in which the variety of calls and the context in which they are produced was recorded and analyzed, revealed that they possess an intricate vocal repertoire and complex set of messages; they have specific calls for specific situations (Snowdon and Cleveland 1982). There is also a grammatical structure to their calls, and a basic lexical syntax, suggesting an unexpected level of complexity present in their communication (Snowdon and Cleveland 1982). There is also indication that individual information is encoded in their alarm calls, which suggests that there could be directionality in their call production (Sproul et al 2006). Roush and Snowdon (2000) and Neyman (1978, as cited in Sproul et al 2006) have found context specificity in both cotton-top alarm calls and food chirps, though these calls seem to be a result of the level of arousal due to personal preference and other social factors, not a response to another’s knowledge of the food. The food associated calls were enough to elicit calling from the other monkeys; however there is a lack of playback experiments to confirm functional reference (Clay et al 2012, Roush and Snowdon 2000).      There is also currently little to no evidence that cotton-top tamarins possess volitional control or directionality in their communication; therefore further experimentation is necessary to determine whether these elements are present. Some indication of functional reference is present in other tamarins (red-bellied tamarins (Saguinus labiatus) have functionally referential food calls, Caine et al 1995 as cited in Clay et al 2012), however there is no consistency in calls between species or genera; one species of tamarin can have functionally referential calls, where there is no evidence for functional reference in any other species. The more we know about species specific differences in primate and other animal communication, the closer we can come to understanding the development of triadic and intentional communication systems as a whole.       This study aims to discover the level of volitional control and directionality that is present in cotton-top tamarin calls, and to determine to what degree their communication is intentional. To establish this, biologically relevant stimuli (either a highly desired snack, or a simulated threat) was presented to two semi-isolated groups of tamarins, housed in separate rooms but able to communicate with one another through calling. If their communication is volitional, and to some degree directional, as opposed to a fixed-action pattern of response, the first group to receive the stimulus will presumably alert the second, naïve group by way of a high rate of calling. The second group, however, has no naive group to inform, and so their rate of calling should be much lower than one would expect of a fixed-action pattern. To control for habituation as a cause for the lower rate of calling, there will be an inconsistent condition, in which the second room will be presented a different, less salient stimulus than was presented to the first room. If volitional communication has occurred between the first and second room, and the first calls referred to the higher-salience stimulus, then the unexpected stimulus should elicit a high rate of calling from the second room. By testing to see whether or not there is voluntary control over call initiation and inhibition, and directionality by intentionally increasing call rate to inform an ignorant group, this study reveals whether intentional communication occurs in cotton-top tamarins.MethodsSubjects      Eight captive-born adult cotton-top tamarins (Saguinus oedipus), four female and four male, were the subjects of this study. Their ages ranged from 7 years (Egret) to 20 years old (Quince), with adult onset occurring around 21 months. The tamarins were family reared and housed in pairs in 0.85m X 1.5M X 2.3M cages separated by opaque sheets, in two separate but adjacent monkey colony rooms in the animal facility at Carleton College (Figure 2). The subjects were on a 12-h light-dark cycle and had free access to water. All animals were maintained on a complete diet consisting of a yogurt and applesauce breakfast, a lunch of Zupreem Marmoset chow, fruits, and vegetables, and a protein snack (e.g. cottage cheese, tuna, hamburger, eggs, cereal, peanuts) daily. The protocol and care of the monkeys were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, and the monkeys were inspected regularly by USDA and IACUC and their care consistently met animal welfare standards.Apparatus      The stimuli were a highly preferred food item (hamburger, preference determined by Neiworth, personal communication), a less preferred food item (celery, preference determined by Neiworth, personal communication), a latex horse head mask simulating a predator worn by an experimenter which covered their entire head and hair (Figure 1), or a non-predator human experimenter in normal lab dress. The tamarins used in this study were familiar with most of the stimuli presented, specifically the experimenter and the food presentation. The masked predator stimulus was novel, though they had been exposed to a predator-like human previously (Neiworth 2012).      The monkeys were tested in their resident cages, located in the monkey colony rooms in the animal facility at Carleton College. These rooms are directly adjacent to one another, and allow the tamarins to communicate through the walls. That calls can be heard across the rooms is evident by the frequent long calls that are received and responded to by neighboring monkeys.       Monkey calls were recorded using the internal microphone of a Mac Book Pro laptop running Audacity, licensed through Carleton College. The laptop was placed on a white projector cart measuring 1.17m in height with a shelf measuring 40 X 50cm (Figure 2).Procedure      The tamarins were exposed to four different conditions to elicit calling behavior. A baseline of communication was determined by a reaction condition in one of the rooms of monkeys (hereafter referred to as the “first room”), then the neighboring group of monkeys (the “second room”) was exposed to a stimulus, specifically determined by the condition, in order to get an informed reaction. The order of which room was designated the first room versus the second room was randomly determined at the beginning of each condition. The experiment was then repeated with the order switched, so that both rooms are both the “first” and “second” room. The four stimulus conditions in this study lasted for four sessions each, with one day off between conditions. The conditions are described below, and for each, monkey calls in reaction to the stimulus were recorded for three minutes during and immediately following exposure. Appetitive Test      The tamarins’ reaction to the hamburger stimulus was recorded for three minutes to establish the baseline of response. In the appetitive-consistent condition (hereafter referred to as AC1 for first exposure and AC2 for second exposure), the tamarins’ response to the hamburger stimulus after overhearing communication from the adjacent room about the same stimulus was recorded for three minutes. In the appetitive-inconsistent condition (hereafter referred to as AI1 for first exposure and AI2 for second exposure), the tamarins’ response to a celery stimulus after overhearing communication from the adjacent room about the hamburger stimulus was recorded for three minutes. Predator Test      The tamarins’ reaction to the predator stimulus (presented for one minute) was recorded during and after presentation for a total of three minutes to establish a baseline of response. In predator-consistent condition (hereafter referred to as PC1 for first exposure and PC2 for second exposure), the tamarins’ reaction to the predator stimulus after overhearing communication about the same stimulus from the adjacent room was recorded for three minutes. In a predator-inconsistent condition (hereafter referred to as PI1 for first exposure and PI2 for second exposure), the tamarins’ reaction to an experimenter’s presence (presented for one minute) after overhearing communication about the predator stimulus from the adjacent room was recorded for a total of three minutes.       The response of each room of tamarins was analyzed to determine what constituted a singular call unit (a period of sound surrounded by silence). Audacity files were filtered using the “Find Sound” function, setting silence as anything less than 24 dB, the minimum loudness of the tamarin chirps recorded, with a minimum duration of 0.1 second.  These sounds were labeled and counted, after extraneous sounds were cut from the files (doors opening and closing, et cetera). The number of calls per room per session (considered “raw call data” and consisting of all of the animals in the room, not counted by individual) were compiled and analyzed. A repeated measures mixed model ANOVA test was run using SPSS software, to determine the significance of differences between the conditions. Results      Raw call data was analyzed by a repeated measures mixed model ANOVA, with exposure condition (first or second exposure) as a repeated measure and stimulus type (predator consistent, predator inconsistent, appetitive consistent, and appetitive inconsistent), and session day as independent fixed factors. The number of calls per room per session ranged from 13 calls (predator stimulus) to 358 (appetitive stimulus).       There was a trend difference in number of calls elicited per day, independent of type of stimulus (F(3,16)=2.873, p=0.069), with the last day of exposure (= 79.19) generating less calls than the first two days(=104.8, day one, = 113.5, day two) on average over all conditions. (Figure 3). This suggests that the tamarins habituated (to a varying degree) to all stimuli over the course of the four test sessions.       There was a significant difference in number calls generated between the predator and appetitive stimuli (F(3,16)=33.09, p>0.05), with the appetitive stimulus (= 175, consistent condition, = 99.4, inconsistent condition) generating significantly more calls than the predator stimulus (= 58.5, consistent condition, = 45.5, inconsistent condition)(Figure 4).       There was a significant within-subjects effect in exposure condition by stimulus type (F(3,16)=3.334 p=0.046), indicating that number of calls elicited to each stimulus (predator consistent, predator inconsistent, appetitive consistent, and appetitive inconsistent) varies significantly with the day of exposure (first or second, Figure 5). For both the predator and the appetitive conditions, the second consistent exposure evoked a higher rate of calling than the first exposure (for both consistent and inconsistent conditions), whereas the second exposure to the inconsistent condition elicited a lower rate of calling than to the first exposure of both conditions. Although the appetitive stimulus elicited more calling overall (Figure 2), the same pattern holds for each stimulus. Discussion and Conclusions	Shown in Figure 3a, the tamarins habituate well to PC1. However, after overhearing communication from the other tamarins about the incoming predator, the cotton-top tamarins showed increased sensitization; they had an elevated rate of calling over the last two sessions of PC2 (Figure 3a). PI1 (identical to PC1) showed a similar pattern, although there was sensitization on the second session; because the inconsistent trials were run after the consistent conditions, the tamarins could have been primed to call to the presence of the predator, as they were in PC2. PI2 (the experimenter in normal lab dress) showed faster habituation and a lower rate of calling than to any other condition. The tamarins’ own experience with the experimenter allowed for this fast rate of habituation (Figure 3a).	The appetitive stimulus showed a mild degree of habituation over the four sessions for each condition (Figure 3b). AC2 showed a similar pattern to that of PC2 (Figure 3a); there was an increased rate of calling overall, with habituation by the last session, suggesting that the tamarins were also primed to call to the food delivery after overhearing consistent communication. AI1 showed a sensitization on the second session, as with the predator, followed by habituation, while AI2 showed a lower rate of response overall (Figure 3b).       AI1, although identical to AC1, elicited less calling than AC1 (not significant). This decrease could be due to habituation to the hamburger over the course of the study, as the inconsistent conditions were run after the consistent conditions. Elowson et al (1991) determined that food-associated calling rate is indicative of food preference; cotton-top tamarins will call more to highly preferred foods than to mildly preferable or unpreferred foods. As their number of exposures to the hamburger increased, their preference could have decreased, thus decreasing their rate of calling. However, because this decrease is not significant, this habituation likely did not have an impact on the overall results. 	When the number of calls over the entire condition is considered, rather than over each session, both consistent and inconsistent exposures to the appetitive stimulus elicited significantly more calls than the predator stimulus (Figure 4). This difference could be attributed to the extremely high rate of calling elicited by the hamburger stimulus (Elowson et al 1991). It could also be that the predator stimulus was ineffective at evoking calling behavior. The mask was chosen for several reasons – the tamarins have shown a dramatic response to a masked intruder previously (Neiworth 2012), and because this particular mask covered the experimenter’s head and hair while distorting head shape. However, cotton-top tamarins do not necessarily use the face to recognize specific individuals; shoes or hair color are often better indicators to the tamarins of individuality (Neiworth, personal communication). Although shoes were not worn during the predator conditions, the tamarins could have been attending to body language, smell, or another factor to identify the experimenter. The masked intruder is also not a biologically relevant predator; in future experimentation, the use of a predator stimulus relevant to tamarin evolutionary history (large predatory bird, etc) should be used to elicit predator-specific calls. 	Regardless of this decreased call rate to the predator stimulus, the same pattern holds true for both appetitive and predator stimuli (Figure 5). It appears that overheard consistent communication serves to prime the tamarins to the incoming stimulus, thus increasing their call rate on the second exposure. However, the tamarins ignore inconsistent communication when calling, shown by the decreased call rate to the second exposure of the inconsistent conditions. This could be indicative of some level of semantics inherent in the calls, such that the tamarins understand that the communication is inconsistent and choose to ignore them in their own call rate, also suggesting a level of voluntary control over call initiation. This suggests intention in the reception of the calls, rather than in their production.       Overall, these results would suggest that cotton-top tamarins do not direct their calling due to the knowledge level of nearby recipients. There is a possibility of volitional control over call production, although with this experimental design it is difficult to tease out. Most of the evidence thus far points to a fixed-action, affective pattern of response that is more indicative of the tamarins’ internal emotional state than their perception of the mental state of their conspecifics, although they could be intentionally ignoring inconsistent communication.       A problem inherent in the research design is that the cognitive aspect of call reception is as of yet unknown. There is little evidence to suggest that the tamarins are taking the inconsistent calling into consideration and choosing to call less, rather than the lower salience stimulus simply eliciting fewer calls. It is not necessarily the case that the “surprise” of the inconsistent second exposure would be enough to elicit a higher rate of calling by itself. The results of this study are therefore difficult to determine, and further research into the cognitive aspects of calling behavior in cotton-top tamarins is merited.       Clay et al (2012) states that the ultimate function of food calls varies with the differing social and ecological pressures faced by the species in question. For example, in small-bodied primate species, food calling serves to recruit conspecifics, thereby reducing predation, as well as serving to declare ownership, reducing aggression during feeding and facilitating group cohesion (Clay et al 2012). The rate of calling, therefore, is more referential than the specific call itself; it follows, then, that the tamarins would not modulate their rate of calling to a preferred food even after hearing consistent communication about it, and that they would simply call less to an unpreferred food, even if it was unexpected.       Because there is still ambiguity surrounding the functional reference of cotton-top tamarin alarm and food calls, the results of this study are further complicated. According to Roush and Snowdon (2000), two varieties of chirps are produced exclusively during feeding, suggesting context specificity; however, there are no playback experiments as of yet to effectively define functional reference. The same situation occurs when considering alarm calls; Neyman (1978 as cited in Sproul 2006) states that tamarins have distinct alarm calls for aerial and ground predators, but playback experiments are lacking. Without more conclusive evidence for functional reference, it is difficult to say with certainty that the tamarins are overhearing specific communication in the first place, and not simply responding to the overheard level of arousal.       Future studies on the topic of intentional communication in cotton-top tamarins should first conclusively determine the functional reference of their calls, in both food and alarm context, through playback experiments. The use of a more salient predator stimulus should be used in place of a masked experimenter to attempt to elicit predator-specific alarm calls. Finally, an experimental design that leaves little room for differing interpretation should be determined in order to more decisively conclude whether or not cotton-top tamarins are capable of intentional communication.       ReferencesBugnyar, T., Kijne, M., & Kotrschal, K. (2001). Food calling in ravens: are yells referential signals?. Animal Behaviour, 61(5), 949-958.Cheyney D. L. & Seyfarth R. M. (1988) Assessment of meaning and the detection of unreliable signals by vervet monkeys. Animal Behaviour, 36, 477-486.Cheney, D., & Seyfarth, R. (1990). Attending to behaviour versus attending to knowledge: examining monkeys' attribution of mental states. Animal Behaviour, 40(4), 742-753.Clay, Z., Smith, C. L., & Blumstein, D. T. (2012). Food-associated vocalizations in mammals and birds: what do these calls really mean? Animal Behaviour, 83(2), 323-330.Cleveland, J., & Snowdon, C. T. (1982). The Complex Vocal Repertoire of the Adult Cotton?top Tamarin (Saguinus oedipus oedipus). Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie, 58(3), 231-270.Crockford, C., Wittig, R.M., Mundry, R., & Zuberbuhler, K. (2012) Wild chimpanzees inform ignorant group members of danger. Current Biology, 22, 142-146. Di Bitetti, M. S. (2003). Food-associated calls of tufted capuchin monkeys (Cebus apella nigritus) are functionally referential signals. Behaviour, 140(5), 565-592.Elowson,A.M., Tannenbaum, P.L., & Snowdon, C.T. (1991) Food-associated calls correlate with food preferences in cotton-top tamarins. Animal Behaviour, 42(6), 931-937.Evans, C. S. (2002). Cracking the code: communication and cognition in birds.The cognitive animal (M. Bekoff, C. Allen, and GM Burghardt, Editors). MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, 315-322.Evans, C. S., & Evans, L. (2007). Representational signalling in birds. Biology Letters, 3(1), 8-11.Faragó, T., Pongrácz, P., Range, F., Virányi, Z., & Miklósi, Á. (2010). ‘The bone is mine’: affective and referential aspects of dog growls. Animal Behaviour, 79(4), 917-925.Furrer, R. D., & Manser, M. B. (2009). The Evolution of Urgency?Based and Functionally Referential Alarm Calls in Ground?Dwelling Species. The American Naturalist, 173(3), 400-410.Gros-Louis, J. (2004). The function of food-associated calls in white-faced capuchin monkeys, Cebus capucinus, from the perspective of the signaller. Animal Behaviour, 67(3), 431-440.Karakashian, S. J., Gyger, M., & Marler, P. (1988). Audience effects on alarm calling in chickens (Gallus gallus). Journal of Comparative Psychology, 102(2), 129.Kitzmann, C. D., & Caine, N. G. (2009). Marmoset (Callithrix geoffroyi) Food?Associated Calls are Functionally Referential. Ethology, 115(5), 439-448.Manser, M.B. (2013) Semantic communication in vervet monkeys and other animals. Animal Behaviour, 86, 491-496.Marler, P., Dufty, A., & Pickert, R. (1986). Vocal communication in the domestic chicken: II. Is a sender sensitive to the presence and nature of a receiver?. Animal Behaviour, 34, 194-198.Neiworth, J. J. (2013). Chasing sounds. Behavioural processes, 93, 111-115.Pereira, M. E., & Macedonia, J. M. (1991). Ringtailed lemur anti-predator calls denote predator class, not response urgency. Animal Behaviour, 41(3), 543-544.Roush, R. S., & Snowdon, C. T. (2000). Quality, quantity, distribution and audience effects on food calling in cotton—top tamarins. Ethology, 106(8), 673-690.Schel, A.M., Machanda, Z., Townsend, S.W., Zuberbuhler, K., Slocombe, K.E. (2013) Chimpanzee food calls are directed at specific individuals. Animal Behaviour, 86(5), 955-965.Seyfarth, R. M., Cheney, D. L., & Marler, P. (1980). Vervet monkey alarm calls: semantic communication in a free-ranging primate. Animal Behaviour, 28(4), 1070-1094.Townsend, S. W., & Manser, M. B. (2013). Functionally referential communication in mammals: the past, present and the future. Ethology, 119(1), 1-11.Sproul, C., Palleroni, A., & Hauser, M. D. (2006). Cottontop tamarin, Saguinus oedipus, alarm calls contain sufficient information for recognition of individual identity. Animal Behaviour, 72(6), 1379-1385.Tomasello, M., & Call, J. (1997). Primate cognition. Oxford University Press.Zuberbühler, K., Cheney, D. L., & Seyfarth, R. M. (1999). Conceptual semantics in a nonhuman primate. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 113(1), 33-42.Slocombe, K. E., & Zuberbühler, K. (2005). Functionally referential communication in a chimpanzee. Current Biology, 15(19), 1779-1784.                                     ZackINTENTIONAL CALLING IN TAMARINS2